We are proud that CWIX, as a unique, original, concrete and pragmatic exercise,
has established itself as the largest NATO interoperability event of its kind.
And, CWIX perfectly demonstrates that interoperability does not relate only to
the technical aspects, or to say 'the hardware', but also on how to operate,
including procedures, an even the doctrinal aspects.

CWIX 2021 took place from <Date ranges>. At this year's event, nine nations took part
from the Joint Force Training Centre (JFTC) in <Country Name>, <Country ISO code>,
and twenty nations from national sites. Over the three-week period, NATO and national
participants improved interoperability between <Number of commands> deployable command and control capabilities.
More than 12,000 test cases were conducting over multiple networks from over 70 remote
test sites that spanned 13 time zones from Hawaii (USA) to Ankara (TUR).

Key Observations and Lessons from CWIX 2021
Up until execution, planning for CWIX 2021 took place entirely online based on COVID-19 and
related travel restrictions and leveraged experience from the previous year. With nations
taking part from the JFTC and distributed test sites, this was a first opportunity
to execute a 'hybrid' CWIX Execution event and provided much food-for-thought
for how future WIX events should be delivered. National and focus area leads identified
the following observations that will need to be considered early in the 2022 planning cycle:
- Throughout the planning cycle, most national and focus area leads reported
many challenges associated with online planning and coordination;
- Very late NAC approval for partner nations (May 2021) and the EU (EEAS/EUMS) (June 2021)
resulted in most withdrawing and others only 'Observing' due to lack of time to plan
for their participation. This affected many nations testing and left some key leadership
positions vacent or with temporary stand-ins. Of the nine partners intending
to participate in CWIX 2021, only <Country ISO Code>, <Country ISO Code>
and <Country ISO Code> were able to test a limited number of capabilities;
- National leads participating from JFTC reported significant benefits to in-person
collaboration with other nations as a means of quickly solving connection issues
and fixing interoperability bugs;
- National and focus area leads who were testing from distributed test sites and
home locations reported instances where routine work distractions prevented
participants from focusing on interoperability tests and hampered their coordination efforts;
- The lack of in-person planning events meant that many participants were untrained on
CWIX processes (test workflows, QA, etc.), placing an additional burden on the
wider management group;
- Interoperability tests took place on six separate networks. Although these
were open early, the distributed nature of this event meant that some nations
lost time establishing connections and had less time to complete formal
interoperability test programs. Networks have remained open for nations to complete their tests.

Operational Relevance of CWIX 2021
Although CWIX allows nations to de-risk C2 capabilities before a NATO exercise or mission,
the limitations placed upon CWIX 2021 meant that technical testing was the focus for most
participants. That said, the operational relevance of CWIX 2021 was illustrated
during the eVIP event as it provided vignettes set within an operational storyline
of (a NATO humanitarian crisis response) to highlight innovative capabilities
tested by NATO and nations during CWIX 2021.